# DATA 606 Capstone Project - Proposal

# Predicting Maryland Home Prices and Finding their Value

### What is your issue of interest (provide sufficient background information)?

I would like to create a model on predicting home prices in Maryland, more specifically in Anne Arundel, Harford, Baltimore, and Howard counties.  I also have an interest in finding a way to place weights on the values of certain homes based on a buyers preferences, if time permits me to do so.  In today's very competitive market, it is difficult for first time home buyers like myself to jump into.  I'm planning on purchasing a home in 2023 and a model like this could prove valuable to me and all the others buying a home in the next year.  Prices are high and so are desires for a home, so a model in finding homes that are undervalued or offer the most based on a buyer's preferences gives the buyer the best house for their money.  Buying a home is one of the biggest purchases people will make in their life, making it a tough decision.  The model I'd like to create I feel would give the home buyer more confidence in their decision that they are getting a good value thus making it easier for them to know what they want, at what price, and be able to make an offer quickly and confidently.  Investors may also be interested in this model as it relates to finding value in certain properties that are good for positive cash flow based on its features.

### Why is this issue important to you and/or to others?

The issue is important to me as a first time home buyer because there are so many things to consider and weighing the decisions is difficult to do.  I think seeing the price differential between homes in certain areas, certain styles, and with different features will give me a better understanding of where exactly the value in a home comes from and what areas, styles, and features are most costly.  I and many other home buyers, in our heads, place different values on different features of a home and need ot understand what that means in terms of our budget.  For example if I really want to live waterfront, how much does that cost vs a new construction home not on the water and with 1,000 more square feet than I'd have in the waterfront home?  From that I can better determine if I think the cost of living on the water is worth it in comparison to a nicer home not on the water for the same budget.  I can also uncover things like whether or not waterfront homes appreciate faster, and maybe that helps me feel more comfortable with the purchase of the waterfront home if I decide I value that more.  All in all, uncovering facts like this and being able to weigh the different features of a house more effectively is important to me and anyone else buying a home.  A finding such as waterfront homes appreciating faster, and in a certain area would also prove very useful to investors looking to profit from appreciation.  I think if I found time for it as well, like I mentioned above, if I could make a model that takes in a weight for each feature the buyer values and their budget and outputs the list of houses that offer them the best value in descending order that would prove extremely useful.

### What questions do you have in mind and would like to answer?

The biggest question I'd like to answer is what areas, styles, and features of the home cost the most, and based on that what homes then offer the most value for their cost?  I think a lot of people try to make a decision that offers them the best value for their money.  With that, they would be very interested to the answer to the question about how to find the most value to them in the home that they buy.  Questions on what impacts the price the most - is it being on the water, the number of bedrooms, the amount of land, or so on?  Additionally, exploratory questions like whether or not waterfront homes appreciate faster?  How much waterfront homes cost in comparison to non-waterfront?  Is new construction a lot more costly than choosing not to do new construction?  Are homes pricier in certain cities?  Could school districts be a factor?  Is there more new construction in certain areas?  Were homes going for above asking price more so during a specific time period?

### Where do you get the data to analyze and help answer your questions (creditability of source, quality of data, size of data, attributes of data. etc.)?

I plan to get the data from a real estate agent, a family member has dumped housing data for me to be able to analyze.  I put an example file in the data directory of the repo below.  The max the real estate agent could dump was 5,000 rows per file, so I have 10 files, giving roughly 50,000 rows, and am asking the agent for more data in different counties.  The data contains fields such as category, list date, off market date, settlement date, original price, list price, sold price, address including city, state, and zip, county, school district, acres total, whether its a house for older persons, condo association, homeowners association, age, square footage, style, number of floors, whether it has a basement, garage spaces, fireplace, waterfront, new construction, number of bedrooms, and number of bathrooms among other things.  It is credible striaght from the real estate agent's dump of it, of high quality and consistent.  Like I said, I'm still working with the real estate agent to see how much data from different counties I can get, but the goal is to get at least Anne Arundel, Harford, Baltimore, and Howard counties.  I expect to have the full dataset this upcoming work week of the 14th.

Data example here: [Data Example](https://github.com/zvance1/Zach_DATA606/tree/main/data)

### What will be your unit of analysis (for example, patient, organization, or country)? Roughly how many units (observations) do you expect to analyze?

My unit of analysis will be individual homes.  Again, targeting Anne Arundel, Harford, Baltimore, and Howard counties, and expecting roughly 40-50,000 homes for each county where they are the homes sold in the last 5 years for each county.

### What variables/measures do you plan to use in your analysis (variables should be tied to the questions in #3)?

I plan to use the sold price as the actual price of the house to be predicted and use a combination of mostly all of the attributes listed above to try to predict that value, trying different things and seeing which of them are more significant than others.  In exploratory analysis I plan on using some of those attributes in combination with each other, for example, to answer the question of whether or not homes were selling above asking price more so for a certain time than other times, I could group by month, and take the average selling price - asking price per month then graph the result to see the answer to the question.

### What kinds of techniques/models do you plan to use (for example, clustering, NLP, ARIMA, etc.)?

I plan to use a combination of models in predicting home price - Support Vector Regression, linear regression, decision tree, random forest.  With these I will be able to output information about how each of the features are used within the models.  Regression will place weights on the features for which I can analyze to see what the regression models placed the highest weights on thus corresponding to being more important for predicting price.  In the decision trees, the top level first decision will be the one it chooses to eliminate the most error and thus the factor it sees as most important for determining price.  The factors being ranked by the levels of the tree and /or forest (collection of decision trees).  In other analysis, I'd like to use k means clustering to see if certain price ranges are more prevalant in certain areas.  I could run k means clustering on all the homes, or on select homes specifically to try to keep their features relatively constant to narrow down on what areas are the priciest for a similar home.

### How do you plan to develop/apply ML and how you evaluate/compare the performance of the models?

Like I mentioned previously, I plan to test the predicted price against the sold price of the home in an effort to perform supervised machine learning on it.  I will measure the accuracy/ performance of the model based on how close the predicted value is to the actual sale price of the home.  To do this I will train the model with cross fold validation in numerous ways to see what gives me the best results.  To evaluate the performance of the clustering models, I intend to map the results as color coded points on top of the map of the counties so that trends in home price can be seen based on points on a map.  To evaluate whether or not the resulting clusters make sense I can use some of my knowledge on what I expect the results to be based on my exploratory analysis to see if the clusters formed make sense.

### What outcomes do you intend to achieve (better understanding of problems, tools to help solve problems, predictive analytics with practicle applications, etc)?

I want to achieve a combination of all of those outcomes.  I think the overarching problem of everything mentioned here is how best to find the most value in homes for perspective home buyers.  Via the predicting of home prices I can perform predictive analytics while using the results to gain a better understanding of the problem.  I'll be able to visualize which factors of the home have the biggest effect on its cost.  Another thing I think I will find is that there may be plenty of error, different people place different values on homes and the sale price may not be a 100% good true value number.  There may also be factors that are not be captured well in the data such as the current condition of the home, whether it has well water or public, and so on.  What I'm creating is a tool to help solve the problem, and I think gaining a better understanding of the problem by running predictive analytics accomplishes that goal and I, as well as anyone reading this will learn a lot about home values and key factors involved.
